Our beautiful homeland,
O so fearless and gracious.
Our fathers’ ancient glory,
May you be blessed forever.
Dear, you are our only glory,
Dear, you are our only one,
Dear, we love your plains,
Dear, we love your mountains.
Drava, Sava, keep on flowing,
Danube, do not lose your vigour,
Deep blue sea, tell the world,
That a Croat loves his homeland.
Whilst his fields are kissed by sunshine,
Whilst his oaks are whipped by wild winds,
Whilst his dear ones go to heaven,
Whilst his live heart beats.
I kindly ask you for a minute of silence for all the dead, missing, the veterans, pregnant women, and unborn children.
Eternal rest grant unto them, O Lord... (and let perpetual light shine upon them.)
May they rest in peace.
Dear ladies and gentlemen, good day. Praised be Jesus and Mary.
Welcome to the event that the Association"Croatia for Life" has been waiting for five years – the opening of the Croatian Rose monument.
First of all, I want to thank Juraj Elez and professor Renata Somrak for the dignified performance of the Croatian national anthem.
I will use the opportunity to greet and thank for his arrival, on behalf of the Archbishop of Đakovo-Osijek, Msgr. Đuro Hranić,
the auxiliary bishop of the Archdiocese of Đakovo-Osijek, Msgr. Ivan Ćurić,
Bishop of Sisak, Msgr. Vlado Košić,
Prefect of Vukovar-Srijem County, Damir Dekanić, and associates, as well as the Mayor of Vukovar, Ivan Penava.
I am glad that the president of the Association "Croatia for Life", Ante Čaljkušić, is among us today,
and I am honored to greet the author of the monument, academic sculptor Lovre Jakšić, whose bust of Jean-Michel Nicolier already adorns the center of Vukovar.
It is a special pleasure for me to welcome Ružica’s daughter Adnana, who traveled from Germany to attend this event.
I have already mentioned that the Association"Croatia for Life" has been waiting for this event for five years.
Providence wanted it to be just before the 30th anniversary of the fall of the city of Vukovar,
and the opening date itself on the first anniversary of the death of Ružica’s husband Davor.
Ružica Markobašić and her unborn son Antun were victims of a brutal murder in Ovčara.
We stand in front of this monument here as a sign of lasting memory and gratitude for the sacrifice of Ružica and her son,
but also for all pregnant women, unborn children and all those who laid down their lives believing in Christ and for the freedom of Croatia.
We believe and pray that they enjoy eternal life with the Lord, that their sacrifice was not in vain, and that such crimes will never happen again.
The main coordinator of the Croatian Rose monument project is Lidija Dugan,
who will explain to us what has happened in the past five years and how it has come to this moment of the monument’s ceremonial opening.
Lidija, the floor is yours.
Praised be Jesus and Mary, welcome everyone. It’s nice to see you all.
I would like to tell you a little about how this idea came about
and how this big project that our Association has been working on for the last five years came to fruition.
Namely, the Association ''Croatia for Life'' is an association that fights for the protection of unborn life from conception to natural death,
and we are also the 40 Days for Life initiative that is active in 35 cities throughout our beloved country.
We keep vigil like this in front of hospitals and pray for an end to abortion, that is, for the preservation of every unborn life.
In 2015, when our initiative started with a prayer here in front of our hospital in Vukovar,
our big national meeting, where all members from Croatia gathered, took place in Vukovar in May.
During the tour of the city and all war-stricken places,
the retired colonel of the Croatian army, Antun Dugan,
guided us around all the strategic places that were important for Croatia and Vukovar during the Homeland War.
That’s how we got to Ovčara, where he told us the story of Ružica Markobašić,
saying that 200 bushes were planted for all those who died in that place,
but that there was one missing that would mark her son Antun, the unborn child who died there.
As we are an Association that fights for the protection of unborn life, we decided that it would be very nice if we could do something for that unborn Antun.
We then tried in various ways how to pay homage to his victim.
However, some doors were not open to us, some answers were not satisfactory to us, and we simply, apart from that human way, began to pray a lot that the Lord
would enlighten us and we would see what we could do.
That’s how we got the idea and motivation to make a monument that would adorn this very place.
In fact, the place where we usually stand and watch in front of the hospital for 40 days.
We started thinking about what that monument would look like.
Somehow, my original idea was that it should not be in bronze, but that it should be beautiful, in stone, white, immortal, magnificent, and that it should actually
depict the moment of victory and the moment of Ružica’s entry into the eternal kingdom.
That’s what we got with this monument.
We also found an author who would do it for us, and that is our sculptor Lovre Jakšić from the island of Brač.
Since he also made the monument of Jean-Michel that adorns the city center,
we concluded that he would be perfect for doing both this job and task we have for him.
There were many obstacles, a lot of pain, a lot of tears, a lot of things we went through.
But here we are, happy that we finally got to see this wonderful day.
What I would like to point out is that this monument would not have been possible without some people who are very important to us.
These are our architect, Damir Moskalj, our sculptor, Lovre Jakšić, president of the Association, Ante Čaljkušić, who actually came up with the idea
to pay tribute to this victim, and these are all the people who participated so that this place would be openhere
Also, I would like to especially thank our dear mayor, Ivan Penava, who two or three years ago, when we came to him with this idea, supported us and said that he would
and said that he would do everything in his power to help us make it happen.
We envision this place as a place of victory.
We envision this place as a place of healing,
so that some day all mothers who may have experienced an abortion,
whether they chose to do it themselves, unfortunately, or whether they experienced miscarriage, loss of a child or family members who lost a pregnant woman in the war,
can come to it. They can come here, they can look at Ružica, and they can simply feel peace in their heart.
God’s providence is truly magnificent,
When we agreed with the mayor the day which would actually be important and which would serve as the opening of the memorial, he chose it to be November 16, exactly 2 days before the Column of Remembrance.
exactly 2 days before the Column of Remembrance.
November 16 ended up being the day when we mark one year since the death of Mr. Davor Markobašić,
who was the husband of Ružica Markobašić and who was the father of our little unborn Antun.
November 16 today is Tuesday when the Church celebrates the day of the week dedicated to St. Anthony, and the little one’s name was Antun.
This day is also important because our generals, Ante Gotovina and others, were released on November 16, 2012.
So we see the finger of God in all this.
We would like to thank everyone who participated in any way, and the person I really especially want to greet, to whom I want to thank,
is our very good friend, Mr. Zlatko Zaoborni, who participated in everything, coordinated everything, listened to our instructions, suggested things
in order to make this monument come to life.
. I thank you once again on behalf of our Association for coming and God bless you. Thank you very much.
Many thanks to Lidija Dugan. Now I kindly ask Mayor Ivan Penava to address us with a few words.
Good day to all.
I greet everyone according to the order that our moderator used.
Lidija also, and I thank her for it, thanked and greeted
all the key people in this project.
I would also like to greet the Members of Parliament who are here with us today.
Mrs. Marijana Petir, Ante Prkačin and Ćipo Stipe Mlinarić.
Lidija has said everything. I really don’t need to add anything.
I want to thank you all for your contribution,
and indeed there are many of you who have contributed to today’s event.
I’m glad. Lidia’s words exude a certain peace and that’s how it should be.
I am currently in an exclusive phase of restlessness because of the previous press conference and this 30th anniversary and all that load of unresolved issues.
I think you recognize and know what I’m talking about.
I was impressed by one thought in the invitation and I will repeat it. . I will actually mention only that.
A conclusion with which I agree.
Namely, that because of bad stories, vile stories about the late Davor Markobašić himself, Ružica very likely ended up in this way.
And that is a story that is repeated continuously to our people, to individuals among us, to our city.
That we are always some radicals, extremists, Nazis, idiots.
In fact, they are trying to take away our human form in some way, so that we can be written off more easily, which, unfortunately, is
best evidenced by this monument in the form of Ružica and the tragedy of her unborn son Antun.
I invite you to calmly be aware that this is the case, not to stop
with peace in ourselves and not to agree that the Danube continues to flow, and not to forget these things and to solve these things.
Because we still have a lot of tasks ahead of us that we have to solve.
I would like it to be in peace and in the spirit as Lidija said. Thank you all.
Thank you very much, mayor. It’s time for three recitals.
The first "Our Little Lady" by Antun Gustav Matoš
will be performed by student Eva Šibalić, the child of a large family whose grandfather was a  colonel in the Croatian Army.
Matoš’s "Consolationin Hair" will be interpreted by Marin Miletić,
, a man who recently lost his beloved wife,
and who showed us the power of prayer and faith in God by his example.
"Letter to my unborn child", which was written by a young Slovenian teacher who was eight months pregnant the night before her execution execution on Bleiburg,
will be read by Katarina Seider, a member of the choir of St. Cecilia of the Vukovar parish of Saints Philip and James.
All three recitals will be accompanied by Ivana Huk on the violin.
There is a little lady Mary,
who grows fonder to me as she gets older.
Because she was the first who heavily gave birth to me,
lead me holding my weak little hand.
She was the first one on this world to love me,
the first who prayed to Lord for me.
She bath me with a tear,
God bless her.
May angel give her a tear for each tear.
She breastfed me with the milk of her love,
she thought me this lovely language,
, in which then I will sweetly talk endearly,
while I might drop dead behind a fence.
Only you I love, dear nation.
Only you I serve, oh, Croatia.
Who art the soul,
language,
mother,
and not a sign,
For you I live,
only for you.
Amen!
Antun Gustav Matoš
Solace of hair.
I watched you last night.
Asleep.
Sad.
You were dead.
In the fatal hall, in the flower idyl.
On the high deathbed, in the candle lit agony,
resolved
to give you my life
as sacrifice.
I did not cry.
I did not.
Astonished I stood in the fatal hall, full of grand death, in doubt that dark, clear, eyes are the ones
from where better life shined for me.
Everything,
but everything is dead:
eyes,
breath
and hands,
everything I wanted to bring to life with desperation
in a blind horror and in the passion of torment.
In the fatal hall,
in thoughts of grey.
Only
your hair
was still alive
so it told me:
''Be still!
In death one dreams.''
A few more hours until the end of my life.
Oh, God,
oh, You sorrowful Mother of God, my Mother,
You know that I die innocent,
as Your innocent Son died...
Oh, my child, my gentle angel,
how I would love to see the features of your face,
the gentle pearls of your eyes.
I will never see your blossoming smile to make me happy,
, oh, my child, my tender flower!
I will never see your white hands,
you will never stretch them out to return my sweet embrace.
I will never be able to press you to my heart,
even though you are so close to it.
Never, my child!
Somewhere in the embrace of the forest will be our home,
which will be decorated with spring flowers.
My mouth
will not be able to sing a song over your cradle,
and your cradle will be me alone,
although so cold and hardened.
The branches above us will sing to you and rustle a beloved lullaby.
Oh, just sleep peacefully, my child,
you are so close to my loving heart.
And yet,
it cannot tear you out of the embrace of death that awaits you too.
Just sleep peacefully,
because you have no idea what’s coming.
You will die with me, and I will die with you.
And then, when the fight is over,
we will go to God together...
When I felt you under my heart for the first time and felt your restlessness, , I already dreamed that for the first time I would bring you close to God to be spattered
with baptismal water
–you will be spattered soon by my blood.
You will be baptized with the beloved blood of your own mother.
Soon, my body will be a gifted ciborium.
You, on the other hand, my child, the Host in it.
The Creator will take the Host of your being in his loving hands and place it in His Divine Heart.
There I will see you for the first time, there I will see your face.
There you will see your mother and for the first time you will call out to me:
"Oh, mom!"
Look, my child, the morning is coming.
For us, the last morning of suffering.
The morning will dawn again, , but without tears.
It will dawn with God.
Just sleep peacefully, your mother is watching over you.
Look, the red dawn announces that the day is waking up...
and the last stars are extinguished in it.
The clock on the tower announces the morning that will take us on our last journey...
but I won’t be alone...
you will be with me, my child.
And Mary, like then with her Son on Calvary, will go with us.
In our last breaths, they will stand by us and take us to the Eternal Home of Joy.
No one will disturb our happiness anymore.
We will be immersed
in the Eternal God,
His eternal peace.
My baby, just sleep.
Mary is with us.
Look...
they’re coming...
Many thanks to Eva, Marin, Katarina and Ivana.
They left a piece of their soul in their interpretations.
It is time for the blessing of the monument and those present as well as the service of the Word.
I kindly ask the auxiliary bishop of the Archdiocese of Đakovo-Osijek, Mons. Ivan Ćurić, for his blessing.
In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. (Amen.)
Peace be with you. (And with your spirit.)
Let us sing the antiphon:
Send forth your spirit, O Lord, and renew the peace of the earth.
(Send forth your spirit, O Lord,
and renew the peace of the earth!)
Praise the Lord, my soul.
Lord my God, you are very great.
How many are your works, Lord!
The earth is full of your creatures.
When you hide your face, they are terrified; when you take away their breath, they die and return to the dust.
When you send your Spirit, they are created,and you renew the face of the ground.
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit (as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.)
Let us sing the antiphon:
I praise you, I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made
(I praise you, I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made).
You have searched me, Lord,and you know me.
You are familiar with all my ways.
For you created my inmost being;
you knit me together in my mother’s womb
I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
your works are wonderful,I know that full well.
My frame was not hidden from you when
I was made in the secret place,when I was woven together in the depths of the earth.
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit (as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.)
Dear Father Bishop Vlado,
dear Franciscan fathers,
all dear priest brothers and religious sisters.
Honorable Members of Parliament,
Mr. Prefect, Mr. Mayor, and all representatives of social life,
respected doctors, representatives of this National Memorial Hospital in Vukovar,
all dear brothers and sisters,
and in a special way dear members of the Association "Croatia for Life",
led by the president, Mr. Ante Čaljkušić, and in this eastern part of our homeland,
as we see, by the initiator of this memorial work, Mrs. Lidija Dugan.
We listened and partly pronounced the biblical words from the 104th and 139th psalms together.
They contain a small psalmody, a hymn to God the creator.
And wherever we turn in depth, in height, on all sides of our world and universe, we recognize and discover God’s creatures.
In this light of faith and Christian spirituality, my dear people, rests the original dignity of everything that exists.
And not only at the beginning.
. God is the restorer of life by the power of his spirit.
Everything can be restored by its power.
And in the most excellent way, as a reflection of God’s existence, in His image, there is also a living man.
That is why this occasion strengthens us in the Christian teaching that human life is sacred.
Because from the very beginning it requires the Creator’s action and remains permanently connected to the creator, its only purpose
God is the only master of life from beginning to end.
No one, under any circumstances, can claim the right to directly kill an innocent human creature of God.
At the time of the Homeland War in 1994,
Saint Pope John Paul II told the church and the whole world:
"We are all called to do what is possible in order to remove from human society not only the horror of war,
but also any threat to human rights starting from the indisputable right to life that a human person has from conception.
In extinguishing the right to life, even if only of one human being, is contained", says the Holy Pope,
"the germ of the ultimate violence of war."
And precisely in the summer of 1991, when war sufferings began throughout our homeland, and especially in this region of Vukovar,
the same pope, having in front of him numerous tragedies caused by wars in our modern times, would state as follows:
"To this cemetery of the victims of human cruelty of the 20th century another large cemetery is added.
Cemetery of the unborn.
The cemetery of the helpless whose face not even their own mother has met.
And they already had that life, they were already conceived, they were developing under the heart of their mothers without suspecting the danger of death."
There is so much, my dear brothers and sisters, that is holy, dignified, gentle and sensitive,
unfortunately, often unprotected and endangered, displayed in this monument to the pregnant woman.
Remembering the cruelly slaughtered pregnant Ružica Markobašić and her unborn child Antun.
An event that,
with its horror, only added to the pot of tragic suffering and suffering endured 30 years ago here in the city of Vukovar, in Ovčara and throughout our Croatia.
This monument is also a memorial to all the pregnant women who died in the war, women in, as we say, a blessed state,
in whose sufferings we always hear the double cry of both the mother and the unborn child.
That is why we would like to thank the Association"Croatia for Life
for reminding us of this with this accomplished initiative.
That is why today in a special way in this place we want to surrender human life to divine providence,
and especially the life of unborn children in our homeland and around the world.
Because life has an unrepeatable dignity, all the more so as each person is called to participate in God’s life.
Always living the joy of the truth that the apostle John testifies to us:
"See what great love the Father has lavished on us, that we should be called children of God! And that is what we are!"
That is why we will pray the Lord’s prayer, in which Bishop Vlado will lead us in the blessing.
Let’s say our prayer to the Heavenly Father for the blessing of this statue, but also for the blessing of all mothers, pregnant women, and conceived children.
Our Father… who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name;
Invited so many times to join 40 Days for Life, with the Association "Croatia for
Thy kingdom come;
Thy will be done
on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us;
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
Let us pray.
God, originator and protector of human life, graciously receive and answer our prayers
for the late Ružica and all mothers murdered while carrying their unborn children under their hearts.
Accept them and their murdered children with them with your resurrection so that they can rejoice in the fullness of life in you, who lives and reigns forever and ever. Amen.
Invited so many times to join 40 Days for Life, with the Association "Croatia for Life.
let us turn to our heavenly Mother in prayer.
We entrust to your Immaculate Heart, Virgin Mary, every child conceived, but not yet born.
Save its life, and ask all parents for peace and love for it.
Turn your gaze also to the wretched who struggle with the adversities of life, to men and women victims of mindless violence,
to the old and sick, all scarred by indifference and false sympathy.
Make that all who believe in your Son, ready and with love, spread the Gospel of life to the people of our time.
The Lord be with you. (And with your spirit.)
Let the name of the Lord be praised. (Both now and forevermore.)
May the blessing of Almighty God, Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit descend upon us. (Amen.)
This monument also stands here for all pregnant women and their children who died in the wars on Croatian territory.
The fight for pregnant women, their families and unborn children and for building a culture of life is especially close to the heart of the Association Croatia for Life.
The President of the Association, Ante Čaljkušić, will now address us with a few words.
Praised be Jesus and Mary.
Good afternoon.
Dear brothers, dear sisters,
a lot has been said.
I wish you all
a sense of peace.
A feeling of tenderness.
And let these emotions follow you when you go home.
And to convey what you experienced in this place of peace and tranquility.
I want to responsibly share something with you.
My thought.
Brothers and sisters, there is no pandemic and no earthquake that can be compared to the evil of killing an unborn child and a pregnant woman.
No!
Because actually that act is an earthquake of the human soul and a disease of the human spirit.
And the only one who can cure and heal our wounds is the Lord Jesus.
We have heard the verses, we have heard the words of encouragement, we have been blessed and now let us keep it in our hearts.
Let us not reject all that we have received today from the Lord, through these people who have turned to you.
Dear friends,
each of you individuallyis
called here to be the protector of another.
When it comes to life, when it comes to, I don’t know what, to be its protector and to be called to give of yourself, even when it hurts and when it’s difficult.
Just so that the other would be better, be well.
Dear politicians, representatives, my friends, Ivan, Marijana, Marin, all present,
you are public representatives of born and unborn Croats.
My dear friends, bishops Ivan and Vlado, you are especially called to serve the born and unborn children of God.
All of us.
Why?
Because each of us is magnificent, each of us is unique in the history of mankind.
Ante Čaljkušić or sculptor Lovre Jakšić or bishop Vlado Košić will never be repeated.
Never anyone of you here.
We are precious for that uniqueness,
and so is our friend and sister in Christ Ružica Markobašić
Markobašić and her unborn son Antun, together with the father and husband
who passed away a year ago, our dear Davor.
What we did was the least we could do for this family
and for all other families whose pregnant women died on Croatian territories.
And what we can do more for the present
and for the future is to protect, advocate and defend the dignity of every human being in every place from their conception to their natural death.
And we will all see how much Croatian society will change,
how much we will love each other.
Despite our differences, despite various political affiliations, despite different attitudes, one thing connects us.
One thing connects us.
And that is that each of us was conceived.
Even Jesus Christ,
an unborn child, stayed in love under the heart of His mother Mary for 9 months,
precisely so that He would be similar to us.
Let’s remember this well. Let’s remember these words well, because these words that are spoken now
are not from me
but from the Holy Spirit.
And these words that you have heard are blessings,
blessings and only blessings
in abundance.
Finally,
I thank my friend Davoru
and my friend Lovre Jakšić for their patience, who worked with us for 5 years to make this happen.
And one day there will be maybe a booklet, so you will hear a little of this human intrigue. God’s blessing, all the best and let’s rejoice!
Many thanks to Ante Čaljkušić. A big thank you to all of you for being a part of this historic moment for the City of Vukovar, but also for the whole of Croatia.
We have finished the official part of the solemn opening of the monument. Now let us stay together in song and fellowship.
Thank you!